The `prepare-commit-msg` hook is a powerful client-side hook that allows you to modify the commit message _before_ the editor is opened. This hook is invoked by `git commit` right after the default commit message is created, but before the editor is started. It receives the name of the file that holds the commit message, the source of the commit message (e.g., "message", "template", "merge", "squash", "commit"), and the SHA-1 hash of the commit if the source is "commit". This hook is particularly useful for automating the addition of issue tracker IDs, enforcing commit message conventions, or adding boilerplate text.

A common use case is to automatically add a ticket number from your issue tracker to the beginning of each commit message. For example, if you're working on ticket #1234, you could have a script that parses the current branch name (e.g., `feature/1234-some-feature`) and prepends `[#1234]` to the commit message. Another example is adding a standard "Reviewed-by:" line to the end of the commit message, ensuring that all commits are reviewed before being pushed.

Here's a simple example of a `prepare-commit-msg` script (written in bash) that adds a prefix to the commit message based on the current branch:

```bash
#!/bin/bash

MESSAGE_FILE=$1
BRANCH=$(git rev-parse --abbrev-ref HEAD)

if [[ $BRANCH == feature/* ]]; then
  PREFIX="[FEATURE] "
  sed -i "1s/^/$PREFIX/" "$MESSAGE_FILE"
fi
```

This script checks if the current branch starts with "feature/". If it does, it adds "[FEATURE] " to the beginning of the commit message. Remember to make the script executable (`chmod +x .git/hooks/prepare-commit-msg`) for it to work.